so what is critical race theory right
you know I actually came to critical
race theory I'm not going to show that
slide an article that I had read in The
Chronicle of Higher Education in 1993 in
the summer of 1993 I read this page of
this article on page 8 of that of that
newspaper where they used the word
critical race theory I never heard of
the heard the word before when I read
the article I realized this is something
important but I also may recognize this
is something familiar and the familiar
part of it was the research that I have
been doing in ethnic studies African
American Studies Chicano Studies and
that was the familiar part of it but but
critical race Theory this is a
polarizing filter for those of you who
are photographers and you know that a
polarizing filter does a number of
things but one of the it saturates color
it really it brings out the color in a
particular scene but what it also does
have you ever been in a situation like
in the back that window that that
reflection off the mirror we can't see
what's on the other side of that mirror
because of the reflection the I won't
let you allow you to do that but what a
polarizing filter does in the front of a
single lens reflex camera you twist this
ring right here
and you can see what the I can't see it
takes the glare out you can see inside
right so it's an amazing tool for
photographers but for as a researcher a
theory is a lens through which we
observe and interpret social social life
that's what theory is as a sociologist a
social scientist that's how that's how I
use the tool of theory
it helps me interpret social phenomena
when I see something I fear II often
comes to mind how do I explain what I'm
seeing when I work with young people as
young as elementary school kids children
students I asked them to interpret what
they're seeing and they're theorizing
right they're theorizing there's some
amazing theories that come out of the
minds and miles of young young scholars
and in kindergarten through third grade
but but but theory is a lens to which we
observe and interpret social life
as you turn the lens things become clear
I would argue that rate as you turn the
critical user critical race lens race
and racism come into focus because
they're essential to the analysis right
and I have to say this is that in my
work I don't apologize for doing this
work I don't apologize for centering
race and racism in the work that I do
right that's not all that I do because
if you if you if you look at my working
definition of critical race theory in
education I argue that critical race
theory is the wake of work of scholars
like many people in this room who are
who are attempting to develop an
explanatory framework that accounts for
the role of race and racism in education
see I developed this this definition for
education scholars because that's what I
was working at the time right it's now
used in other fields if it came from the
law but but in its use in education it's
using the humanities it's used in social
sciences but it's an important what I
think a really important framework to
use as we do this work and works towards
identifying and challenging racism so
there's a social justice element to
critical race theory it's just not about
observing and interpreting it's about
engaging as part of a larger goal of
identifying and challenging all forms of
subordination so race might get you to a
place but it can be about gender class
sexuality immigrant status etc so it's
that intersection that that critical
race Theory takes us through but BIA by
way of a racial focus or race and racism
focus so that's my working definition of
critical race theory in education